>> Scott Moss: We left off
on creating new issues
with our mode, our linear app.
So I'm going to go ahead and
start that right quick run dev.
There we go,
make sure that's not broken, cool.
Okay, so what we want to do now
is start working on the edit and
delete feature so
we can edit these things right now.
We can't do that, so let's do that,
it's mostly more of the same.
There is a difference, and I was kind of
hinting at it in the previous session,
where we can do server actions without a
use action state hook and without a form.
So we'll be doing that and
then we'll be talking about like how
to get the parameters out of the ID and
things like that, or
get the ID out of the parameters.
Okay, so let's look at the notes for
that, cool.
So editing and deleting an issue,
like I said, it's mostly the same.
So our objective here is one, we got to
go fill out the update issue function.
So we can go make that,
it's nothing really new here.
It's just doing another validation on the
form because you can update every single
field on an issue.
So pretty much the same thing.
And then the delete issue is even
simpler because it's not a form,
it's just pressing a button and
deleting it.
So the actions are pretty simple,
the thing that's different
here is when we go edit and
delete using the actual uI and
you'll see that we're using params here.
So we'll talk about that and
how that works.
And then we'll also talk about how to
actually like call server actions and
things like that from using a transition
and not just a hook, the form hook.
So no, don't want password,
okay, so let's do it.
Let's start with adding our
update issue stuff to our action.
So we can do that by
going over to our repo,
going to the issues page
inside the actions folder.
Let me just close everything, there we go.
And then I already have this function kind
of scoped out here, but it's just vanilla.
We did that, so
it was breaking trying to import it.
So I'm just going to grab that,
pretty simple.
So the first thing we want to do is we
want to get the actual data for the issue
because we're going to be updating the
issue and it's a form, so we're going to.
It's going to be like partial data
because you might update some fields,
you might Update, other fields,
it's not always going to be a complete
issue in which you're updating.
So it's going to be a partial issue,
essentially, so we want to do that.
And then the ID in which
you want to update on.
So we'll get the ID which is a number and
then partial for all the typescript
people, or I'm sorry, let me just
get this right here, called data.
And then partial is something
that's built in a typescript and
you could pass in, whatever type you want.
In this case we have issue data,
so we'll pass that in like that.
And partial just means if there's anything
on this object that's required, as far as
TypeScript goes, or anything on this type
that is required, it is now not required.
That's basically all it is, from there
we want to get the current user,
if not the user, do the same thing,
validate our schema.
You guys know the drill at this point,
so let's just get warmed up.
So we'll say user equals await,
get current user like that.
If not a user, we want to return success,
false message.
You can put whatever you want here,
say unauthorized authorized access and
then add an error message
to say authorize, cool.
If there is a user, we want to go
ahead and validate that schema, so
we can do that using the Zod schema.
The issue schema will
make it a partial one.
Just because again, this,
because you're doing an update,
we don't know what fields you're updating.
So we're not gonna follow the same
requirements as like for instance,
on the database.
It might be a requirement on database
level that you must have an issue name or
something like that.
But that doesn't mean
when you do an update,
you have to update the name of the issue,
maybe you only updated the description.
So we don't wanna follow
the database schema,
which is where this issue data is coming
from, we wanna make that a partial.
So we'll just say the update schema
is the same thing as the input schema or
issue schema, sorry, partial, like that.
And then once you have that,
then we can do a safe parse.
We'll say validation result equals
update schema, safeparse of the data.
Then we can say,
if not validation result success,
we're going to do something
very similar to this.
But in this case it's not unauthorized,
it's just invalid issue or
whatever, you want to put here.
And then we can take those
error messages from Zod and
just flatten them and show them.
So validation error,
flatten filled errors, cool.
And the rest of the stuff is
pretty not that important.
It just really comes down to the business
logic of going through each single one
of these.
And making sure that like you have at
least one of these things here that you're
trying to update and
informing that object.
So you can just copy that and
then just put this into the update,
it's not that big of a deal.
It's definitely a cleaner way to do that,
but we'll just do it like that.
And then lastly, success,
true, yeah, that.
Then you can put whatever
message you want.
So in this case,
issue updated successfully,
there you go,
we'll wrap this in a Try Catch.
I always forget to just do that at
the beginning because normally I don't use
Try Catch.
I actually use like this utility function
that returns an array and
it's either the value or
an error because I hate doing
Try Catch because it's just ugly.
So not used to doing it all the time.
Also, I think JavaScript is,
there's a proposal in JavaScript to do
the same thing with a special syntax.
So really looking forward to that, okay?
And then, yeah, for the error,
you can just do whatever you want,
for the error, return whatever you want.
>> Student: So I'm seeing in the notes
that you have the return type for
this whole function as
promise of action response,
if it's not action response, would that.
I guess, like,
is that what Next JS is expecting,
like an action response or
can you return anything?
>> Scott Moss: Good question,
you can return whatever you want.
This is just a payload shape
that I came up with, yeah.
So it makes no constraints on what
you return, it's totally up to you.
Because when you use this inside
of the use action state hook,
you do whatever you want in that function,
okay?
>> Student: So action response isn't just,
you came up with that?
>> Scott Moss: Yeah, I can.
>> Student: Okay.
>> Scott Moss: Yeah, yeah, the types of-
>> Student: I thought maybe that was like
a Next JS.
>> Scott Moss: No, yeah, it's right here,
nope, I just made it right here.
Yeah, you can do whatever you want, yeah,
yeah, they're pretty flexible.
I can't think of too many places in next
JS where you have to return something
a certain way other than like,
I don't know the route handlers.
But that's with any server you have to
default export a component for a page.
That's it, everything else,
you can do whatever you want,
they don't really make any,
any constraints on that.
So, okay, let's the delete one,
we can just copy that one.
It's pretty straightforward, but
just to walk through it, it's gonna get
the current user, it's not the user, get
out of here, you can't delete anything.
If the user is there, go ahead and
delete it by the issue id.
Although realistically you
should be checking and
make sure this user is deleting an issue
that belongs to them, but that's okay.
We're going to take shortcuts and then,
yeah, send back whatever you want.
>> Student: I know this is just like a,
like a nitpick quote unquote, but
is it, is it easy just to do like.
Or would it make sense to do a,
like a 403 forbidden or something here?
>> Scott Moss: That's a good question, so
think about the context
in which this action.
Well, so the question was, would it
make sense to do a 403 for bid in here?
Think about the context in
which this function is called,
this is a server action.
So chances are it's gonna be called on
some user interaction on the client and
not during a HTTP request to get a page.
So if you are, I don't know,
clicking a button,
clicking a form and
something wrong happened, what would you.
And let's say you were
making the API request,
what would you send back
on the API request?
If in this case 403 is forbidden,
would you send back the 403 so
the client can look at that,
or would you not.
>> Student: Send Back A 403?
>> Scott Moss: That was a trick question,
yeah, you would,
you would send back the 403.
But then if you look at
other things like GraphQL,
where there's always a 200 no matter what.
Right, so
what next JS is doing here is because this
function has no idea how
it's going to be used.
It doesn't know that it's going to be,
it doesn't know that it's
going to be on a form action.
It doesn't know if it's going
to be in a use transition,
it just knows that it's just going to be
running on a server, it's a server action.
So it has access to the request, but it
has no idea what it's going to do there.
And you don't get access to the low level
request object through these server
actions, it's abstracted away from you.
You just get access to the payloads,
the inputs and the outputs.
So the reason I bring up GraphQL
is because it's kind of operating
similar to that.
Whatever you want to show the client as
far as, like, status codes or whatever,
you can just do that here through
the mechanisms of the data.
But not through the raw
implementation of the HTTP request,
because you won't have access
to that through the client.
>> Student: Okay, could you get that with,
like, middleware and Next js,
or could you get that with middleware?
>> Scott Moss: I don't think so,
we are gonna talk about middle.
Are you talking about, like,
the middleware that Next JS has or
some other type of middleware?
>> Student: Just any kind, yeah,
anything to intercept the requests.
>> Scott Moss: To my knowledge,
Next JS does not have a mechanism to
intercept the request for server action.